#1
HEART TALK #1
Calcium and heart disease.
One test, Doctors do to understand a person's risk of heart disease is a coronary artery calcium
scan which is a special type of CT scan. It measures the amount of calcium in the wall of the
coronary arteries and generate a calcium score. The higher the score the greater the risk Heart
attack. If your Calcium score is zero, your risk of heart attack. Higher the score, higher the risk
of heart attack
Calcium makes up just a small part of the harmful buildup known as Plaque which narrows the
coronary arteries. Plaques also contain cholesterol, inflammatory cells, and scar tissue. On the
CT scan, the cholesterol is not visible, but the calcium is easily seen. Because there is a close
correlation between the amount of calcium and amount of plaque,calcium score is a good
indicator of plaque inside the arteries
There is always a question if the calcium in the diet or from the supplements you take affect
your calcium score, according to a study published in one of the major cardiac journals, which
was a 20 year study people 45 to 64 years of age, people who consumed the highest amount of
calcium from their diet
had less calcium in their coronary arteries Compared to people who consume the lowest amount
of calcium. Result is consistent with other well done research showing that dietary calcium is
beneficial, calcium helps to lower blood pressure, possibly by improving the function of the
lining of the blood vessels. It's one reason DASH diet, which stands for dietary approach to
hypertension, includes two servings of low-fat calcium, rich diary foods per day.
So it is better to get enough calcium from the diet. In the United States, 3/4 of the dietary
calcium comes from diary, products and foods featuring diary. People who follow vegan diet,
which excludes diary and other animal based foods, may need to make sure that they get
enough calcium. Many brands of almond milk, oat milk, or other plant based milks are fortified
with calcium.
What about calcium supplements which are often recommended for post menopausal women to
help prevent osteoporosis. Although some research suggest a link between high dose of
calcium say 1000 mg daily supplement and heart disease, other research does not. Still, it is
best to get your calcium from food. Avoid supplements unless your physician recommends one
and many experts advise no more than 500 mg pill per day taken with the food to improve
absorption.
Some of the Calcium rich foods include low fat yogurt,tofu, almond milk,oat
milk,1%milk, ricotta,greek yogurt , kale, cheese, Sardines, salmon
I hope this information will help some of you.
esos Eight Double Zero

Heart talk #28

HEART ATTACK VS CARDIAC ARREST

Heart attack and cardiac arrest- these two terms often used interchangeably, and therefore often there is confusion about them. Heart attack and cardiac arrest are not the same thing.
Every year in the United States about 720,000 adults sustain a first heart attack and 335,000 have a second or third heart attack . Fortunately, the incidence of cardiac arrest is much lower. Only 9.3% of people who had a cardiac arrest outside the hospital setting survive.
It is important to know the correct signs and symptoms of each, and how to respond promptly. The faster these events are treated, the greater the likelihood the individual will recover with minimal or no loss of function. 

HEART ATTACK:
A heart attack is a circulatory problem that happens when a coronary artery is blocked by a clot and prevents blood flow to part of the heart muscle. If the artery isn’t reopened quickly to restore the blood flow, the heart cells supplied by that artery start to die. Symptoms include discomfort in the center of the chest or other part of the upper body, breathlessness, sweating, and nausea. But the heart continues to beat and person remains awake most of the time.

WHAT SHOULD YOU DO:
If you suspect someone is having a heart attack, call 911 immediately. If aspirin is available, give the person a 325 mg of aspirin to CHEW. This aspirin which is an anti-platelet Agent is sometimes sufficient to begin to break up the clot and restore blood flow. Please do not wait to see if symptoms will subside and do not drive the patient to the hospital. Wait for the ambulance to arrive. Emergency personnel will assist the patient en route. Importantly they will call ahead so that heart team will begin treatment immediately upon arrival in the emergency room

CARDIAC ARREST:
Cardiac arrest results from failure of the heart’s electrical system. During cardiac arrest heart abruptly and unexpectedly stops beating. Heart pumps because special electrical cells signal the upper and lower chambers of the heart to contract synchronously. During Cardiac arrest, an electrical misfire, cause the hearts lower chamber called ventricle to flutter or quiver,  causing what is known as ventricular fibrillation. With  no blood delivered to the brain and other organs, the person loses consciousness and drops to the ground. Unless immediate intervention is done, the person will suffer what is known as SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH .During a cardiac arrest, the person will have no pulse and stops breathing . Other symptoms can include irregular, or gasping or choking sounds known as agonal breathing.
Sometimes, a heart attack can trigger cardiac arrest. First hour after the heart attack is the most crucial period. During this period, there is electrical instability in the heart, causing ventricular fibrillation. Scar tissue from a heart attack can also damage the heart, leaving it, unable to pump effectively. Weakend heart is more prone for ventricular fibrillation.
Because cardiac arrest is so closely tied to coronary artery disease, the underlying risk factors  are largely the same. This include smoking, diabetes, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, physical inactivity, obesity, and family history of early coronary artery disease.
Other heart conditions that can predispose people to have a cardiac arrest include weak heart muscle called cardiomyopathy, heart valve problems, and also inherited conditions that affect the hearts electrical system. Some of these conditions affect young people. These include Long QT Syndrome, abnormality in the Rt Lower chamber of the heart called Right Ventricular Dysplasia  and also abnormal thickens of heart muscle, called Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. We hear young athletes dying suddenly, and sometimes this could be related to one of the inherited conditions. Some drug use increases the risk of cardiac arrest, particularly using drug such as cocaine or amphetamines or overdosing on opioids or other pain medications.

The risk of cardiac arrest increases slightly during and for up to 30 minutes after strenuous exercise, especially in people who are out of shape. But the odds are estimated to be one in 1.5 million during any exercise episode, which is far outweighed by the overall heart protection, benefits of exercise. 

WHAT SHOULD A BYSTANDER DO DURING CARDIAC ARREST:
An automatic, external defibrillator called AED will be necessary to restore the heart rhythm. In the meantime, CPR should be performed without delay and without interruption to keep oxygenated blood flowing to vital organs. One person should begin chest compression at the rate of 100 to 120 bpm, while someone else calls 911 and look for an AED. CPR should not stop until Emmergency Medical personnel arrive or an AED can be used to shock the heart back to life.

IT IS A GOOD IDEA FOR ALL OF YOU LEARN PROPER CPR TECHNIQUES. 

KESHAVA AITHAL
ಅಂಕ 8 Double 0

HEART TALK NO 24
TO TAKE OR NOT TO TAKE DAILY BABY ASPIRIN. 
OK Now you are all done with your   Ugadi Celebration, it is time to get back to business. 
For years, doctors prescribed low-dose aspirin for many patients to prevent cardiovascular disease, including heart attack and stroke. However, aspirin is not harmless. It has bleeding risks. Even though bleeding risk of low-dose aspirin is low, it can be significant and the risks and the benefit should be weighed against each other. 
Until 2018 giving low-dose aspirin to prevent heart disease was a norm. In 2018, there were three large clinical trials on the use of aspirin for primary prevention.-that is, in people with risk factors for heart disease, but no history of heart attack, stroke, stents or had heart surgery- this revealed while aspirin reduces the incidence of major cardiovascular events, it also increased the risk of hemorrhagic stroke ( Brain Bleed ) which could be devastating. It also increases gastrointestinal bleeding, resulting in hospitalization, blood transfusion, or even death.
These findings lead to the recommendation that most people with risk factor for cardiovascular disease, but no history of heart attack or stroke should avoid taking daily aspirin as a preventative measure.
How does aspirin work?
Aspirin helps the heart mainly by preventing blood clots. Aspirin acts by blocking an enzyme called.  COX-1. This prevents the formation of Throbaxane A2, a substance that causes platelets to clump together ( Aggregate) and makes platelets less sticky. With less platelet aggregation, aspirin reduces the risk of blood clot formation in arteries, especially in arteries narrowed by atherosclerosis. Most heart attacks occur when an unstable plaque ruptures and blood clot forms, blocking the blood flow. Aspirin can reduce the likelihood or severity of such an event.
Why would many people continue to take aspirin agonist doctors advise. That is because -
-Individuals think that it is better to be safe than sorry and they take it just in case.
They may think that  aspirin, sold over-the-counter and commonly referred to as BABY ASPIRIN and can’t be very dangerous.
-Their parents or grandparents took it, so they were raised with the concept that daily aspirin is cardio protective
Who should take daily aspirin ?
In primary prevention, aspirin has very little role. However, it has a place in secondary prevention., Namely, in individuals who have history of heart attack, stroke, stent  or bypass surgery, all people with peripheral vascular disease. In these people, the benefits of aspirin outweigh risk So, these people should not stop taking aspirin without first discussing with their physicians.
Who else should take aspirin daily?
Some cardiologist recommend aspirin for high risk primary prevention patient with low risk of bleeding. Who belong to this category requires clinical judgment.
Aspirin is unlikely to be beneficial in primary prevention under the age of 40, since their cardiovascular risk is typically low. Aspirin is also not advisable for those older than 70 for primary prevention because of their bleeding risk is higher 
For primary prevention in patients between the ages of 40 and 70, the following factors will help to decide the  need for aspirin.
-10 year cardiovascular risk event exceeding 10%
-Strong family, history of early coronary artery disease, at a young age
-Significant  elevation of Lipoprotein (a) level
-Elevated coronary artery calcium score
In these individuals, the benefits of low-dose aspirin in preventing cardiovascular disease exceeds their bleeding risk 
Bottom line is that if your doctor recommends you discontinue aspirin, stop taking it. If your doctor advised you to take daily aspirin, never stop it unless discussing this with your health care provider. 
Keshava Aithal
ಅಂಕ 8 Double 0

HEART TALK #number 19
CALCULATING YOUR CARDIOVASCULAR RISK
Cardiovascular disease is the leading  cause of death in the world. One of the secrets to long and healthy life is to prevent the consequences of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. The best place to start is by learning your cardiovascular risk so that you can take necessary steps to lower it  If you don’t know your risk, you won’t have the opportunity to prevent it. 
Your individual risk of suffering a serious consequences of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease can be determined using a formula, design to calculate the percentage of risk, over 10 year period or life time. The lower the percentage,lower the chance and higher the percentage, the higher the chance you will suffer significant heart and vascularproblem.
Several different scoring systems are available. They share several common risk factors but differ from each other depending on the studies on which they were based. 
STANDARD U.S. CALCULATOR-
The most widely used calculator in the U.S.is the Pooled cohort risk calculator which estimates the 10 year risk of first atherosclerotic cardiovascular event. Input your age, gender, race, blood pressure, total cholesterol, and high density cholesterol, and answer yes or no to a few questions- whether you have diabetes, whether you were a smoker or Are being treated for hypertension. The calculator then calculates your risk as follows.
-Low risk: less than 5%
-borderline risk: 5%-7.4%
-intermediate risk: 7.5% to 19.9%
-high risk: more than 20%.
Generally speaking, those with risk of 7.5% or higher are candidates for Statin therapy. 
In spite of its popularity, this calculator is controversial because it omits 2 risk factors, namely family history, and the presence of inflammation.
Family history is a very powerful risk factor. Physicians can modify the calculator to include it.
Inflammation measured by a blood test for high sensitivity C reactive, protein. ( hs CRP ) is a proven predictor of risk. Without including these factors, the calculation may not be accurate.
THE REYNOLDS RISK SCORE
Whether or not either parent had a heart attack before the age of 60-and inflammation measured by hsCRP are included in this risk score calculator. Therefore, this scoring system may provide a more accurate determination of cardiovascular risk in adults who do not have diabetes.
People with diabetes are already at elevated risk of heart attack, and stroke anyway.
THE EUROPEAN SYSTEM-
U.S Pooled Cohort risk calculator ignores, geographical differences. European risk calculator do not. 
The SCORE2 and SCORE2-OP calculators take into consideration, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk
 in the country, where an individual  resides
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATION-
Risk calculators use the most common risk factors for cardiovascular disease, however, there are many other risk  factors which can raise an individual risk. Examples include elevated Lipo protein (a), high calcium score and diseases that increase systemic inflammation such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus.
Other factors are associated with  pregnancy and female hormone changes. These include history of preeclampsia, gestational, diabetes, development of hypertension during pregnancy and menopause prior to age 40. 
NEXT STEP-
When once you know your risk, you need to act upon it. . This is best accomplished by having an honest discussion with your physician.
Risk calculators generally provide 10 year risk estimates, but it’s a good idea to lower the lifetime risk. This is because your cardiovascular risk will change as you age. For example, a 50 year old man with mildly elevated LDL may have a low 10 year risk of cardiovascular disease, but his lifetime risk may be higher.
A heart attack can change your life. A stroke can make you disabled. Your goal should be to prevent such adverse events.
Where to find these risk calculators 
-Pooled cohort calculator Risk Calculator:clinicalc.com/Cardiology/ASCVD/PooledCohort.aspx
-REYNOLDS Risk Score:www.reynoldsriskscore.org/default.aspx
-SCORE2 and SCORE2-OP:
www.escardio.org/Education/Practice-Tools/CVD-prevention-toolbox/SCORE-Risk-Charts
Keshava Aithal
ಅಂಕ 8 Double 0

HEART TALK #42

INHERITED HIGH CHOLESTEROL
( FAMILIAL HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA )

Almost 1/3 of the adult Americans have high level of bad cholesterol or LDL cholesterol which doubles the risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Most of these people likely have dozens of different, genetic mutations, each of which raises LDL by a little bit. Overtime, coupled with less than ideal diet, and not enough exercise, their LDL level slowly increases.
About 5% of the population have LDL cholesterol level more than 190 and in them the risk of heart disease is five times higher than people with near optimal LDL level. Inthis group, minority have familial hypercholesteremia or FH which is a genetic condition that affects about one in 250 adults 

WHAT IS FH
Most people with FH have a mutation or variant in one of the three different genes that provide instructions that help remove excess LDL from the bloodstream. Those people who inherit one variant from a parent have heterozygous FH which can cause LDL level anywhere from 190 to 350 mg/dL . People who inherit 2 variants , that is one from each parent, have homozygous FH. This is a very rare condition and occurs only about 4 in a million population and it can raise LDL level as high as 1000 mg/dL.

DIAGNOSIS OF FH
Diagnosis is based on family history of very high cholesterol or premature cardiovascular disease before the age of 55 in men and before the age of 65 in women. 
In them, LDL in the blood stream can accumulate on the  eye lids, causing small, cholesterol field nodules  called XANTHELESMA. It can also deposit under tendons, especially those along the backs of the hands, the elbows or  the back of the ankles. These are called TENDON XANTHOMAS.  Accumulations of these deposits around the cornea will produce white ring around the cornea called.CORNEAL ARCUS. But the biggest threat is the buildup of LDL cholesterol in the arteries supplying the heart. People with untreated FH can sustain heart attack in their 40s or earlier,  likely because of the cumulative exposure to high LDL,  starting at birth

If a parent or a sibling has very high cholesterol or had a heart attack at a young age, that is before the age of 55 in men or 65 in women, that is a red flag for possible FH. Genetic testing isn’t strictly necessary, as high LDL is reliable sign of heart disease risk in anyone, regardless of cause.   However, FH testing can be beneficial for your biological parents, siblings, and children, each of whom have a 50/50 chance of having the same FH variant

Present guidelines, recommend checking cholesterol level in children at least once between the ages of 9 and 11 and again between the ages of 17 and 21.

Complications of FH
If untreated, FH can lead to
-Early atherosclerosis
-Heart attacks and strokes earlier in life
-Sudden cardiac death
-Aortic stenosis ( causing narrowing of the Aortic Valve)-In severe cases, especially with homozygous FH

Treatment of very high LDL
The present cholesterol treatment guidelines emphasize the importance of lowering the high LD leveland keeping it low for decades. Whatever the underlying cause may be, treating severe hyper cholesterolemia makes sense. The first choice is a high intensity statin,such as Atorvastatin 40 to 80 mg daily or 
Rosuvastatin 20 to 40 mg daily. At these doses, the LDL should come down by at least 50%. In those high risk patients whose LDL remains elevated and not at goal, additional medication may be needed. These include.:
-Ezetimibe( Zetia )-which helps to prevent cholesterol  
 absorption from the gut
-Bempedoic acid( Nexletol)-that blocks the cholesterol production in the liver
-Alirocumab ( Praluent ) or Evalocumab ( Repatha )- injectable drugs that helps to remove excess LDL from the bloodstream. These are given twice a month.
-Incliseron ( Leqvio )- twice yearly injection that interferes with a protein in the liver that regulates LDL

LIPOPROTEIN APHERESIS:
This is a procedure which is used to rapidly and significantly lower. The LDL cholesterol level in patient with severe hypercholesterolemia ( mainly for patients with Homozygous FH ), especially those who do not respond adequately to medications. It is like dialysis for cholesterol. During the procedure, blood is drawn from the patient and cholesterol is removed from the plasma and the remaining blood is returned to the patient. Unfortunately, it has to be done once every one to two weeks. Effect is temporary and LDL level begins  to rise again after the procedure. This treatment needs to be continued long-term unless some mother effective treatment such as GENE THERAPY is available.

Of course, heart healthy diet, regular exercise, and smoking cessation should also be continued.

Keshava Aithal
ಅಂಕ 8 Double 0

# 59.1
HEART TALK # 59 
CARDIOVASCULAR EFFECTS OF SNOW SHOVELING
	◦	Friends,
I have sent this once before. I have revised it and sent this again for the benefit of those who venture into shoveling the snow this time 
. 
About hundred people, mostly men dies during or just after shoveling snow each year in US and many more are admitted to the hospital with chest pain or other heart related symptoms .
Deeper the snow and longer the snowfall, higher the rates of heart attacks. 

Why should this happen?
Shoveling, snow, including pushing a heavy snowblower can raise your heart rate and blood pressure more quickly and more dramatically. Snow shoveling is very similar to performing a peak exercise on a stress test, so it puts a lot of strain on your heart. The difference is that 85% of the predicted maximum heart rate which is aimed during the peak stress test in your doctors office, is achieved within two minutes of heavy snow shoveling, and this puts a lot of strain on your heart and more so for someone who isn’t used to actually exercising regularly.

WHY SNOW SHOVELING IS DANGEROUS TO YOUR HEART
	1.	Intense exercise and cold temperature. First, shoveling snow put much higher workload on the heart than what people normally do for their exercise. To estimate the intensity of an activity or exercise, experts often use the term metabolic equivalent.(Mets). One MET is how much energy you use just sitting still. Moderate intensity exercises are 3 to 5.9 METs and vigorous exercise is like shoveling snow are 6 METs and higher.
	2.	So when you are shoveling snow , you can reach your maximum heart rate and Blood Pressure after just a few minutes, as your heart has to work hard to send oxygenated blood to your legs and arm muscles. Snow shoveling requires use of arm muscles, which, for most people is more strenuous than other exercise. If you have coronary artery disease, that is one or more of your heart arteries are narrowed, there may not be enough blood to supply your heart muscles. That results in discomfort, also known as Angina. If the discomfort gets. worse and persists, that is a heart attack. 
	3.	After a snowstorm, it is quite cold outside and windy and cold temperature can make our arteries  constrict. This further worsens any blood flow problems in the arteries of the heart.   
So it’s likely that the intense physical exertion from shoveling snow combined with cold weather is what makes this practice risky for people who have or who are at risk for heart disease. We don’t hear anyone having a heart attack while raking leaves, partly because it is not as cold and effort isn’t as intense. It is about 4 METs 

The impact of snow removal is especially concerning for people who already have cardiovascular risks like sedentary lifestyle, obesity, being a current or farmer smoker, having diabetes, high cholesterol or high blood pressure as well as people who have had a heart attack or stroke. People with these characteristics and those who have had bypass surgery or coronary artery stenting simply should not be shoveling snow.

Symptoms of heart attack after showing snow
Chest  discomfort, trouble, breathing or discomfort that radiates down the arm or into the neck are hallmark signs of potential heart attack. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop and seek medical attention right away. Call 911, not your spouse driving you to the ER .You should also pay attention to other less common signs of a heart attack because not everyone have classical symptoms. These less frequent symptoms include dizziness, lightheadedness, getting tired more easily, feeling like a cold sweat is coming. Unfortunately, the first symptom of heart attack could be sudden death.

So what is the solution?
The philosophy that GOD PUTS THE SNOW THERE AND HE WILL TAKE IT AWAY-doesn’t help-in that case, he will take several weeks. Many Cardiologists suggest that if you had a normal stress test and the test showed no reason for concern or you  routinely do vigorous exercise, such as running, playing single tennis or cycling 10 mph or faster, it is reasonable to remove an inch or two of snow from your driveway or sidewalk. But do it slowly and pay close attention to how you are feeling. You shouldn’t be doing your entire driveway at one sitting. Shovel a small portion, take rest and do some more. Even maneuvering a heavy snowblower can be taxing. Best thing to do is, after a heaviest snowfall, please play it safe and hire a professional Please don’t ask me to pay the professional. Remember, I am retired. Unfortunately you have to pay.  That is the money well spent. 
Remember,thick heavy snow is more difficult to clear and more strenuous   Pushing the snow with a shovel is less taxing to your heart than  lifting and throwing. 

TIPS TO REDUCE THE INCREASED RISK FROM SNOW SHOVELING
-If you have known or suspected Cardiovascular disease or risk factor for heart disease, get someone else to do your snow removal for you ( NOT YOUR SPOUSE OR FRIENDS).  
-If you must shovel the snow, start gradually and pace yourself. -Always cover your mouth and nose, wear layered clothing, as well as a hat and glosses. 
-Ideally, push or sweep the snow rather than lifting and throwing it,that action involves little less exertion.
-Be extremely careful when the wind is blowing, the wind makes the temperature feel even colder than it is and will increase the
 effect of the cold on your heart
-Breath continuously and don’t hold your breath
-Avoid shoveling right after waking
-Stay well hydrated
-Stop immediately if you feel unwell.

And also don’t forget the other effects of snow shoveling, such as injuring your back, falling and having a fracture or other injuries.
DON’T COMPLAIN LATER THAT I DIDN’T WARN YOU   

All the above information are well known to all of you. I’m just reiterating the well known facts. 
Good Luck during this  snow storm. REMEMBER NO BODY IS IMMUNE. 
I STRONGLY URGE EACH ONE OF YOU TO LEARN CARDIO PULMONARY RESUSCITATION
(CPR). . 
GOOD LUCK AND BE SAFE. 

Keshava Aithal
ಅಂಕ 8 Double 0

HEART TALK. # 60

WHAT IS APO B TEST AND WHO SHOULD HAVE IT
Excess amount of cholesterol in our  bloodstream, can accumulate in our arteries, causing heart attack or a stroke or peripheral arterial disease. Standard blood test, which include total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL cholesterol, and HDL cholesterol may not always give a full picture about the risk. Many people, especially those with diabetes, fatty liver disease, and abdominal obesity may benefit from another test called Apolipoprotein B also called Apo B test

Cholesterol is a waxy substance, and it is water insoluble, and therefore it cannot freely circulate in the bloodstream. It is packaged into tiny protein-covered particles, called Lipoproteins, which helped them to move freely in the circulation. Apo B is  a protein that attaches to harmful fat particles in the blood to form Lipoprotein, including low density lipoprotein or LDL.An Apo B test measures the number of LDL and other fat particles that can contribute to blocked arteries. It is a better indicator of your  risk than LDL cholesterol, which is an estimate rather than direct measurement.
All the lipoproteins that contribute to clogged arteries, known as atherogenic particles carry a single Apo B molecule on their  surface. But they differ in the amount of cholesterol they carry. They include not only LDL cholesterol, but also intermediate density lipoprotein.( IDL), very low density, Lipoprotein(VLDL), chylomicrons( the largest, lowest density particles made mainly of fat) and lipoprotein (a)   

A standard cholesterol test usually reports your total cholesterol- which is the sum of your VLDL, LDL, IDL AND HDL combined. . Some labs also report  non-HDL cholesterol, which is total cholesterol minus the HDL. This value measures all the cholesterol in  atherogenic Apo B particles. But this does not reveal the actual number of these particles, which carry varying  amount of cholesterol.

APO TEST RESULTS
The apo B number is important because LDL particles-which carry  most of the cholesterol in your  blood-come in a range of sizes and are not created equal. If the LDL particle in your blood are mostly on the small size, you will have a greater number of these particles for any given LDL cholesterol level compared to someone with larger particles. The more particles are traveling in your blood, the more likely they are to become stuck inside your arterial wall. So, while your LDL cholesterol value may appear normal or even low, your 
apo B maybe high
Since the apo B test reveals the total number of atherogenic
particles in the blood, it provides a better picture of a person‘s risk of cardiovascular disease

Apo B numbers
In healthy people, apo B values are less than 90 mg/dL which is considered acceptable. Values between 90 and 129 mg/dL ore considered borderline high to moderately elevated. Values greater than 130 mg/dl are linked to a much higher risk for cardiovascular diseas. However, it is better to keep the number less than 70 for high risk patients

WHO NEEDS APO B TEST
This test is widely available. There are two reasons why apo B test is not done routinely.
	1.	Based on decades of research that relies on cholesterol values, regular lipid panels is deeply ingrained as the standard way to assist heart disease risk
	2.	LDL cholesterol and Apo B are very closely related, so for most people, LDL cholesterol is generally a good surrogate  for Apo B
Present guideline suggests that people with heart disease aim for an LDL level below 55 mg/dL. While.an Apo B of 90 mg/dL is fine in a healthy person, an ideal Apo B value is less than 70 mg/dL, if you have multiple risk factors or you already have heart disease

People with metabolic syndrome, pre-diabetes, diabetes, abdominal obesity, elevated triglycerides, or fatty liver disease- are more likely to have high Apo B levels. These people should consider Apo B testing. This should also be considered in people with strong family history of early heart, disease, as well as those with normal or low LDL level and have evidence of cardiovascular disease.

HOW TO IMPROVE APO B LEVEL
Lifestyle habits, such as following a Mediterranean diet, getting regular exercise can moderately lower the number. Cholesterol, lowering medication, including statins, Ezetimibe ( Zetia), Bempedoic acid( Nexletol ),PCSK9 inhibitors such as Alirocumab(praluent), Evolocumab ( Repatha), and Inclisiran (Lequivo )- these are much more effective in improving apo B level. 

Keshava Aithal
ಅಂಕ 8 double 0